Tokenized Cloud Auth Enablement For Operators (#1339)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/cloud-integration/tokenized-auth-enablement-operators-on-cloud.md

creation-date: 2023-01-21
last-updated: 2023-04-19
tracking-link: # link to the tracking ticket (for example: Jira Feature or Epic ticket) that corresponds to this enhancement
  - https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OCPBU-4
  - https://issues.redhat.com/browse/PORTENABLE-471
  - https://issues.redhat.com/browse/CCO-286
see-also:
  - []
replaces:
  - []
superseded-by:
  - []
---

# Tokenized Authentication for Red Hat Operators on Cloud Providers

## Release Signoff Checklist

- [ ] Enhancement is `implementable`
- [ ] Design details are appropriately documented from clear requirements
- [ ] Test plan is defined
- [ ] Graduation criteria for dev preview, tech preview, GA
- [ ] User-facing documentation is created in [openshift-docs](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/)

## Summary

Many Cloud Providers offer services that allow authentication via Temporary Access Tokens (TAT).

For example, Amazon Web Services (AWS) Secure Token Service (STS) allows you to request temporary limited-privilege
credentials. A concrete example is write permission on an S3 bucket on AWS. STS is supported on all the major cloud
providers where OpenShift is deployed.

> Currently, several Red Hat operators provide detailed instructions for how to use the operator on clusters where CCO is

Author: ```suggestion
Currently, several Red Hat operators provide detailed instructions for how to use the operator on clusters where Cloud Credential Operator (CCO) is
```

> in Manual Mode. The process is designed to have manual operations performed by the customer that are inconsistent across

Author: ```suggestion
in Manual Mode, a mode where CCO is not capable of provisioning credentials on its own. The process is designed to have manual operations performed by the customer that are inconsistent across
```

> in Manual Mode, a mode where CCO is not capable of provisioning credentials on its own. The process is designed to have manual operations performed by the customer that are inconsistent across

Author: ```suggestion
in Manual Mode, a mode where CCO is not capable of provisioning credentials on its own. The process has manual operations performed by the customer that are inconsistent across
```

layered product operators.

This enhancement seeks to bring a unified set of standards and tooling to the process of enabling an
operator to access cloud provider resources using TAT, and improve the UX for consumers of these operators. 

## Motivation

Several Red Hat operators have normal operating modes where they assure their operands have required cloud 

> resources to perform properly. In Mint Mode, CCO will automatically create the IAM roles and credentials required for 

Author: ```suggestion
resources to perform properly. Most often, these operators use the Cloud Credential Operator's CredentialsRequest API in Mint mode to automatically create the IAM roles and credentials required for 
```

the operator to assume the role and authenticate with the Cloud Provider.

In Manual mode or more generally on clusters that support TAT (CCO not necessarily installed), an admin installing an 
operator is required to:

Extract the CredentialsRequest from the operator's image or codebase in order to know what IAM role is appropriate for 
the operator to assume
if using the [Cloud Credential Operator Utility](https://github.com/openshift/cloud-credential-operator/blob/master/docs/ccoctl.md), `ccoctl`:
1. Find and download a compatible `ccoctl` binary
2. Accept that `ccoctl` requires elevated privileges to create roles with necessary permissions.
3. Use `ccoctl` to create the IAM Role
4. Use `ccoctl` to create the secret with the credentials expected by the operator

Here is a diagram for how this works on AWS:

![](STS_today.jpg)

This enhancement seeks to unify this process across operators so users of several of them have the same experience and
similar steps to perform. We aim to automate and reduce those steps as much as possible to make installing operators
(via OLM) simpler on clusters where TAT authentication is supported.

> 

Author: ```suggestion

For an example of how operators are currently navigating accessing cloud resources today, see the AWS STS install instructions for the AWS EFS CSI Driver Operator (https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.11/storage/container_storage_interface/persistent-storage-csi-aws-efs.html#efs-sts_persistent-storage-csi-aws-efs)
```

  - "@JoelSpeed " # for CredentialsRequest changes
creation-date: 2023-01-21
last-updated: 2023-04-19
tracking-link: # link to the tracking ticket (for example: Jira Feature or Epic ticket) that corresponds to this enhancement
  - https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OCPBU-4
  - https://issues.redhat.com/browse/PORTENABLE-471
  - https://issues.redhat.com/browse/CCO-286
see-also:
  - []
replaces:
  - []
superseded-by:
  - []
---

# Tokenized Authentication for Red Hat Operators on Cloud Providers

## Release Signoff Checklist

- [ ] Enhancement is `implementable`
- [ ] Design details are appropriately documented from clear requirements
- [ ] Test plan is defined
- [ ] Graduation criteria for dev preview, tech preview, GA
- [ ] User-facing documentation is created in [openshift-docs](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/)

## Summary

Many Cloud Providers offer services that allow authentication via Temporary Access Tokens (TAT).

For example, Amazon Web Services (AWS) Secure Token Service (STS) allows you to request temporary limited-privilege

> credentials. A concrete example is write permission on an S3 bucket on AWS. STS is supported on all the major cloud

Reviewer: Might be nice to enumerate the others here, and perhaps explain why TAT is useful / worth an investment.

Reviewer 2: You mean versus long lived credentials? This has essentially become best practices across the hyperscalers over the past 4 years.

Reviewer: Sure - just pointing out that at least to fresh eyes the "why" - even if obvious - is missing from the motivations in the doc :)

Author: I'm going to mark this resolved. The cloud providers do have other, older, authentication methods, but the motivation for this enhancement is based on their offering STS and other methods that provide short-lived creds. That's covered.

providers where OpenShift is deployed.

> Currently, several Red Hat operators provide detailed instructions for how to use the operator on clusters where CCO is

Reviewer: What is CCO and how does it relate?

> in Manual Mode. The process is designed to have manual operations performed by the customer that are inconsistent across

Reviewer: What is Manual Mode?

> layered product operators.

Reviewer: This sentence reads "the process is designed ... to be inconsistent across layered product operators". Is that what you intended to say?

Reviewer 3: What its trying to convey here is that the manual operations required to create identities across each cloud provider are different. The goal of this enhancement is to bring some consistency to this process however users will still have to perform those manual actions, the reason for that is the cluster by design, does not have any privileged IAM actions and therefore these steps cannot be automated.

Author: changed wording.

This enhancement seeks to bring a unified set of standards and tooling to the process of enabling an
operator to access cloud provider resources using TAT, and improve the UX for consumers of these operators. 

## Motivation

Several Red Hat operators have normal operating modes where they assure their operands have required cloud 

> resources to perform properly. In Mint Mode, CCO will automatically create the IAM roles and credentials required for 

Reviewer: Perhaps I'm too unplugged from the ecosystem but a sentence or two explaining the CCO connection would be great. For instance:

> Several Red Hat operators have normal operating modes where they assure their operands have required cloud resources to perform properly. Most often, these operators use the Cloud Credential Operator's `CredentialRequest` API in mint mode to automatically create ...

Author: sounds good, incorporating, thanks

the operator to assume the role and authenticate with the Cloud Provider.

In Manual mode or more generally on clusters that support TAT (CCO not necessarily installed), an admin installing an 
operator is required to:

Extract the CredentialsRequest from the operator's image or codebase in order to know what IAM role is appropriate for 
the operator to assume
if using the [Cloud Credential Operator Utility](https://github.com/openshift/cloud-credential-operator/blob/master/docs/ccoctl.md), `ccoctl`:
1. Find and download a compatible `ccoctl` binary

> 2. Accept that `ccoctl` is a binary you downloaded that has god-mode access to your Cloud Provider

Reviewer: Philosophically doesn't `ccoctl` need only as limited a credential set as any proposed automation for the CCO iteself? Is it not possible for a user to de-escalate `ccoctl` or just uncommon?

Reviewer 2: Correct, in manual mode CCO doesn't actually have the ability to create the roles. Off cluster the IAM admin (not necessarily the cluster admin) runs `ccoctl`, which talks directly to the cloud, using the IAM admin's credentials to create roles.

CCO may in the future grow the ability to validate roles match the CredentialsRequest but will likely never be capable of role creation because most organizations are unwilling to entrust either the cluster or even the openshift admin to manage IAM.

3. Use `ccoctl` to create the IAM Role
4. Use `ccoctl` to create the secret with the credentials expected by the operator in mint mode

Here is a diagram for how this works on AWS:

![](STS_today.jpg)

This enhancement seeks to unify this process across operators so users of several of them have the same experience and
similar steps to perform. We aim to automate and reduce those steps as much as possible to make installing operators
(via OLM) simpler on clusters where TAT authentication is supported.

> ### User Stories

Reviewer 4: can we have here an example of an operator and its functionality - I think it will be useful for better understanding

Author: Added a link to the AWS STS install instructions for AWS EFS CSI Driver Operator. Thanks for the suggestion.

> * As a cluster admin, I want to know which OLM Operators are safe to install because they will not be interacting with

Reviewer: What does `"safe"` mean in this context?

Author: safe in this context means -- will work, have flipped a UX switch to indicate the operator supports TAT mode

  the Cloud Provider on a cluster that only supports TAT authentication with the Cloud Provider
* As a cluster admin, I want to know which OLM Operators support tokenized authentication for my cloud, so that I can

>   provide token-based access for cloud resources for them.

Reviewer: nit: If the proposal is to expand the CCO API surface and have operators create credential requests, the admin is not providing operators tokens as this story implies

 Operators whenever those operators manage resources that authenticate against my cloud so they can function properly
* As a cluster admin, I want the experience of TAT authentication to be as similar as possible from one Cloud Provider 
  to the other, so that I can minimize Cloud Specific knowledge and focus more on OpenShift.
* As an Operator developer, I want to have a standard framework to define tokenized authentication requirements and
  consume them, per supported cloud, so that my operator will work on token-based authentication clusters.
* As an Operator Hub browser, I want to know which operators support tokenized cloud auth and on which clouds so I can
  see only a filtered list of operators that will work on the given cluster.
* As an Operator Hub browser, I want to be informed / reminded in the UI that the cluster only supports TAT 
  authentication with the Cloud Provider, so that I don't confuse the cluster with one that will try to mint long lived
  credentials.
* As an Operator Hub browser, I want to be able to easily provide what's required to the OLM operators I install through
  the UI.

> * As the HyperShift team, where CCO is not installed so the only supported authentication mode is via TAT, I want the

Reviewer 4: so if the operators work in tat mode, cco is not required? if so, i think it's not written clearly in the enhancement - i reached this part without understanding it

Author: We're proposing to add CCO with this new TAT detection code, running in Manual mode, back into HyperShift. I'll try to make that more clear here.

  Red Hat branded operators that must reach the Cloud Provider API, to be enabled to work with TAT credentials in a
  consistent, and automated fashion so that customer can use those operators as easily as possible, driving the use of
  layered products.

### Goals

> Allow Day-2 Operators to access cloud provider resources as seamlessly as possible when being installed, used and

Reviewer: Day-2 Operators is not a defined term in this enhancement, but perhaps is common knowledge?

updated on STS enabled clusters.

While providing the above goal, allow for multi-tenancy. In this sense multi-tenancy means that an operator may

> enable its operands to communicate with the cloud provider instead of communicating with the cloud itself. Operands 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
enable its operands to communicate with the cloud provider instead of the operator communicating with the cloud on the operand's behalf.
```

> enable its operands to communicate with the cloud provider instead of communicating with the cloud itself. Operands 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
enable its operands to communicate with the cloud provider instead of the operator communicating with the cloud on the operand's behalf.
```

Author: I don't think the paragraph would make sense if this change were made.

> would use the same set of credentials as the operator. The operator will need to maintain its own logic to minimize 

Reviewer: I don't see how sharing a set of credentials between all operands helps multi-tenancy. Can you elaborate?

Author: adding "Sharing a set of credentials between all operands to aid multi-tenancy." to the list of non-goals

conflicts when sharing credentials with operands.

Operator authors have a way to notify, guide, and assist Day-2 Operator admins in providing the required cloud provider
credentials matched to their permission needs for install and update.

Ideally, a solution here will work in both HyperShift (TAT always) and non-HyperShift clusters.

### Non-Goals

> Day 1 operators are not included in this proposal, they are pre-provisioned for TAT enabled clusters (at least 

Reviewer: Aside from the work already being done, is there a compelling technical reason that the day-1 operators requiring TAT support would not use the same implementation?

Author: the might, just want to note it's fully out of scope for this EP

for HyperShift)

Bring Your Own Credentials (BYOC) where an operator can manage and distribute credentials to its operands are out of
scope.

## Proposal

**Cloud Credential Operator (CCO) changes**: Adds a token-aware mode, while nominally set in "Manual" mode, CCO will

> look for and process CredentialRequests referenced in Operator CRs when:

Author: Adding a paragraph the CCO changes proposal to cover this.

```bash
# infrastructure platform is AWS
$ oc get infrastructure cluster -o jsonpath --template '{ .status.platform }'
AWS

# credentialsMode is "Manual"
$ oc get cloudcredential cluster -o jsonpath --template '{ .spec.credentialsMode }'
Manual

# serviceAccountIssuer is non empty
$ oc get authentication cluster -o jsonpath --template='{ .spec.serviceAccountIssuer }'
abutcher-oidc.s3.us-east-1.amazonaws.com
```

> 

Reviewer: Why is this an implicit as opposed to an explicit mechanism?

Reviewer 5: The original explicit mechanism proposed was a new `credentialsMode` which entails installing the cluster in that mode and I didn't think a new `credentialsMode` made sense given that the existing `credentialsMode` of `"Manual"` is still relevant as the credentials are manually maintained by the cluster admin. One really needs to check the above to infer STS* capability but it would be cool if there was a singular explicit way to know.

Reviewer 6: \+1 for more obvious detection if an operator should create a CredentialsRequest or not. Right now, our operator does not create it in `Manual` mode, with this enhancement, we would need to check `infrastructure`, `cloudcredential` and `authentication`. That looks IMO quite convoluted.

Author: Perhaps we should externalize the function that does the detection in CCO?

Author: Okay we covered the reasoning for not exposing `util.IsTimedTokenCluster()` in the API offline. @abutcher if you still feel opposed, could you put notes here about why not?

Reviewer 5: Not opposed, would be fine with adding a util to CCO that does the check if it will be useful to consumers.

Reviewer 5: In our sync yesterday we talked about the possibility of setting a configv1 field but decided that the installer wouldn't know it was making a timed token enabled cluster, only that the the installer would be blindly applying manifests that cause the cluster to end up as one.

Author: ah, ah thanks for de-addling me ;-) Okay marking this resolved and adding as a possibility to the text here.

(unused), could expand these permissions to include tools like AWS's Policy Simulator such that it could validate a role
has permissions, and with this CCO could be the alerting mechanism for a changed CredentialsRequest without sufficient 
permissions.

**HyperShift changes**: Include Cloud Credential Operator with token-aware mode (see above). Allows for processing of 
CredentialsRequest objects added by operators.

**OperatorHub and Console changes**: Allow for input from user of additional fields during install depending on the 
Cloud Provider which will result in ENV variables on the Subscription object that are required in the 
CredentialsRequests created by the Operator. Setting the Subscription config.ENV will allow UX for the information 
needed by CCO or webhook, for input of the cloud credentials while not having to change the Subscription API.

Show in OperatorHub that the cluster is in a mode that supports token-based authentication by reading the 
`.spec.serviceAccountIssuer` from the Authentication CR, `.spec.platformSpec.type` from the Infrastructure CR,
`.spec.credentialsMode` from the CloudCredentials CR.

> Show that the operator is enabled for Token-based use by reading the CSV annotation provided by the operator author.

Reviewer 7: I think this is because that is how traditionally things have always been done in OLM/CSV side of things. An example that comes to my mind is - default namespace of the operator etc.

> Show that the operator is enabled for Token-based use by reading the CSV annotation provided by the operator author.

Author: Hemant states the OLM/CSV tradition correctly. TY. I think it fits in okay with that.

> Show that the operator is enabled for Token-based use by reading the CSV annotation provided by the operator author.

Reviewer 7: I am though concerned how it will work when the operator is being installed via CLI. I can see this easily doable via console-gui, but how will users provide this value when they create subscriptions manually?

> Show that the operator is enabled for Token-based use by reading the CSV annotation provided by the operator author.

Reviewer 8: Ok, so, the clusterserviceversion tells us how the operator could/should be deployed and tells us about the capability of the operator? Seems like STS support is a capability that could be first class, curious as to why annotations have been chosen in the past for this kind of thing?

> Show that the operator is enabled for Token-based use by reading the CSV annotation provided by the operator author.

Reviewer 9: I wasn't part of the decision making on that, but i'd speculate:

ease/flexibility of introducing new ones w/o needing api updates to allow them to be specified, and the fact that some of these things are more openshift/downstream concepts that we wouldn't want/be able to encode into an upstream api

> Show that the operator is enabled for Token-based use by reading the CSV annotation provided by the operator author.

Author: yes, what Ben said were all the consideration on the not first-class part of the spec and just as annotations for now.

versions.

### Workflow Description

This diagram shows the steps a user will need to take in the proposed flow (specific to STS):

![](STS_tomorrow.jpg)

Making a layered operator ready to work on an STS enabled cluster will involve the following steps:

Operator installation under the proposed system:
1. user goes to console and starts operator install
2. console detects token-based (STS) cluster, and token-based-supporting operator
3. console prompts user to create roles+supply ARN-type string
4. console creates subscription with ARN-type string embedded as a spec.config.env
5. operator deployment is created with ARN-type string in env
6. operator creates `CredentialsRequest` including the ARN-type string
7. Cloud Credential Operator populates Secret based on `CredentialsRequest`
8. operator loads Secret, makes cloud service requests

For the operator author team:
- Add CredentialRequests to the bundle, known location;
- Add "role-arn"-type fields to the CredentialRequests
- Add references to the CredentialRequests in the CRD spec;
- Use SDK to validate bundle to catch permission changes or mis-configuration

> - Add eventing to report status on a CR to indicate lacking STS credentials for fully operational deploy or update.

Author: Yeah this is just the operator CR and somewhat pushing the scope, but a lot of our discussions initially mentioned how operators should handle the lack of resource permissions, that is, they should do it gracefully. This line is part of doing it gracefully and it would be good to continue to capture it here so that it makes it into any docs that might get derived from this doc for best practices for operator authors.

For the Cloud Credential Operator:

> - Add a Token mode that will watch for CredentialRequests (as per mint mode) and then resolve time-based tokens

Reviewer 8: So is this a new Token mode like Mint or Manual? Does this then contradict the first half of the enhancement which talks about this being an implicit new functionality on Manual mode?

Author: Removed concept of another mode (Token) CCO in favor of CC detecting when time-based tokens are in use. So as you say, implicit functionality added to Manual mode. Making changes everywhere to reflect this new thinking.

> - Add a Token mode that will watch for CredentialRequests (as per mint mode) and then resolve time-based tokens

Author: done

  per cloud platform. 

> - Make Secret resource available for the operator via pod identity webhook. 

Author: is in alternatives well enough. deleted.

> - Pod identity webhook logic to account for per-operand tenancy permissions.

Author: yep, is represented in alternatives well enough

For Operator Administrator:

> - Supply cloud credentials for STS (ARN ID, etc) in the known location and change CR to reflect this.

Reviewer 9: the ARN is supplied to the console/Subscription.  No CR changes needed.

Author: doing in next commit

For OperatorHub, Console:

> - Prompt for missing credentials that prevent fully operational install on STS cluster. Same for upgrades.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
- Prompt user to create credentials and supply the associated ARN in order to allow fully operational install on STS cluster. Same for upgrades.
```

> - Badge indicating STS enabled operators (including operators that don't need cloud credentials)

Author: I'm changing to note that it's optional and not needed for non-cloud using operators

```mermaid
graph  LR
  sa([ServiceAccount Signing Keys]) -- Public <br> Key -->s3[S3 Bucket w/ OIDC Config];
  sa([ServiceAccount Signing Keys]) -- Private <br> Key -->token_signing;
  service<-.->config
  service<-.->Pod
  Pod-->role
  subgraph cluster [AWS]
  s3;
  iam_id[IAM Identity Provider] -- Trust Tokens<br>Signed -->s3;
  role[IAM Role For Pod]<-->service[AWS Services];
  end
  subgraph cluster2 [OpenShift]
  token_signing[Token Signing]-->projected[Projected<br>ServiceAccount<br>Token];
  subgraph Pod
  config[AWS Config File]-->projected
  end
  end
  classDef plain fill:#ddd,stroke:#fff,stroke-width:4px,color:#000;
  classDef k8s fill:#326ce5,stroke:#fff,stroke-width:4px,color:#fff;
  classDef cluster fill:#fff,stroke:#bbb,stroke-width:2px,color:#326ce5;
  classDef cluster2 fill:#fff,stroke:#bbb,stroke-width:2px,color:#326ce5;
  class config,role,service,s3,projected,token_signing,iam_id,pod1,pod2 k8s;
  class sa plain;
  class cluster cluster;
  class cluster2 cluster1;
```

### API Extensions

Added to the CredentialsRequest API 

Adding to the `spec` field, the following subfields:

`cloudTokenString`;<br>

> `cloudTokenPath`

Reviewer 8: Could you convert this to golang so that we can see and discuss what the fields would actually look like?

Reviewer 5: Adding to this that different platforms may have different requirements than a singular `cloudTokenString` which represents the AWS IAM Role ARN with respect to AWS STS and I think we should embed fields within platform specific structs if possible.

For instance, a secret created for GCP (ref: [CCO doc](https://github.com/openshift/cloud-credential-operator/blob/master/docs/gcp_workload_identity.md#changes-in-the-credentials-secret-with-workload-identity)) will need to know the `audience` which appears to include the GCP project as well as the workload identity pool infrastructure:

```json
{
   "type": "external_account",
   // "audience" includes GCP project, workload identity pool / provider
   "audience": "//iam.googleapis.com/projects/123456789/locations/global/workloadIdentityPools/test-pool/providers/test-provider",
   "subject_token_type": "urn:ietf:params:oauth:token-type:jwt",
   "token_url": "https://sts.googleapis.com/v1/token",
   // "service_account_impersonation_url" includes specific service account that will be impersonated, the AWS Role ARN equivalent
   "service_account_impersonation_url": "https://iamcredentials.googleapis.com/v1/projects/-/serviceAccounts/test-service-account-42ssv@test-project.iam.gserviceaccount.com:generateAccessToken",
   // "credential_source" includes the path to the token as mounted on the deployment
   "credential_source": {
      "file": "/path/to/oidc/token",
      "format": {
         "type": "text"
      }
   }
}
```

Reviewer 5: Please also re-add @JoelSpeed as API reviewer to EP. The `CredentialsRequest` should very arguably have been born into the openshift/api repository but lives in CCO's repo.

Author: > Please also re-add @JoelSpeed as API reviewer to EP. The `CredentialsRequest` should very arguably have been born into the openshift/api repository but lives in CCO's repo and in any event would need API review.

Seems done. Marking resolved

On AWS STS, the `cloudTokenString` would be something like:
`arn:aws:iam::269733383066:role/newstscluster-openshift-logging-role-name`<br>
This provides the role information which linked by policy to access various cloud resources.

`cloudTokenPath` provides the path to a JWT web token needed to access the resources.

### Risks and Mitigations

### Drawbacks

## Design Details

We have two PoC items:<br>
How CCO changes might be implemented: https://github.com/openshift/cloud-credential-operator/pull/525

How Cluster Logging Operator can be changed to work with this modified CCO: 
https://github.com/gallettilance/cluster-logging-operator/tree/sts

### Test Plan

Consider the following in developing a test plan for this enhancement:
- CCO should add unit tests for the new manner of working when in Manual mode but the 3-way test indicates running on
  a TAT enabled cluster.
- CCO should add e2e tests for the new manner of working when in Manual mode but the 3-way test indicates running on
  a TAT enabled cluster.

> - CI will need to add a TAT mode for various cloud providers as a base for the e2e tests.

Reviewer 2: In progress https://github.com/openshift/release/pull/38560

> - CI will need to add a TAT mode for various cloud providers as a base for the e2e tests.

Reviewer 10: To be clear, https://github.com/openshift/release/pull/38560 is a periodic version of an existing job that runs on CCO PRs.

> - CI will need to add a TAT mode for various cloud providers as a base for the e2e tests.

Author: An e2e using this: https://github.com/openshift/release/pull/38624/ is also added: which is using a preexisting workflow: `openshift-e2e-aws-manual-oidc-sts` is being added now. There should be a periodic call to this new e2e added to CCO periodics for this, as it confirms the flow outlined for CCO in this enhancement keeps working under STS-enabled conditions.

@2uasimojo can you add a pointer to the job that already runs, just want to make sure there isn't overlap.

- A "canary" operator should be fielded in CI with e2e tests such that we have signal on breaking changes in TAT enabled
  clusters.

### Graduation Criteria

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

### Version Skew Strategy

### Operational Aspects of API Extensions

Should be none. If the new fields on CredentialsRequest are missing, cloud resources will be unavailable for an 
operator, but there should be no other impacts.

#### Failure Modes

If the added CredentialsRequest fields contemplated in this EP are missing, operators should wait them to appear. If
after a timeout period, the fields are not present, the operator should write events about the lack of access to cloud 
resources to the status of an appropriate resource to let admins know there are missing credentials.

## Implementation History

Not implemented yet.

> ## Alternatives

Reviewer 9: another alternative is to use ccoctl to create the roles.

the flow would be:

1) install operator
2) operator creates credreq
3) operator reports failed state waiting on creds
4) admin runs ccoctl against the credreq
5) admin populates the secret+ARN info for the operator

or something along those lines.

cc @sdodson as he's been the one asking about this flow and probably knows better what it would look like.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Alternatives
- Leverage CredentialsRequest after Operator Installation

1. Browse catalog, select Logging Operator
2. If the cluster is TAT emit big red info box "After installation you must grant cloud access by running `ccoctl process -n openshift-logging` or optionally `ccoctl process --offline -n openshift-logging`"
3. Install Operator
4. Operator creates CredReq
5. Operator reports failed / progressing state, whatever is most clear that it's awaiting creds
6. 
  a. Cluster Admin automatically grants permissions `ccoctl process -n openshift-logging` .status.RoleARN, .status.GCPRole, .status.AzureRole populated automatically
  b. 1. Cluster Admin hands off permissions requirements `ccoctl process -n openshift-logging --offline`, generates cloud native permissions doc, forwards to IAM Admin
       2. IAM Admin applies permissions, returns RoleARN, GCPRole, AzureRole to Cluster Admin
       3. Cluster Admin actuates CredRequest via `ccoctl -n openshift-logging bind-role S3Access ARN:blahblahblah:blah` setting .status.RoleARN
 7. CCO does the rest
 
This would set the stage for other statuses to be reported via the CredentialsRequest like "RoleOutOfSync". Not clear how we get from here to OLM inhibiting upgrades on changes though. This has the benefit that permissions are recorded in one structured authoritative location. Though perhaps if a goal is to ensure the required permissions are known prior to installation, perhaps external to the cluster, this becomes harder.
 ```

  class sa plain;
  class cluster cluster;
  class cluster2 cluster1;
```

### API Extensions

Added to the CredentialsRequest API 

We outline this change using the AWS specific change, but other cloud provider specs will follow a similar pattern:
Adding to the `spec.ProviderSpec` field, where `spec.ProviderSpec` would be an `AWSProviderSpec` for AWS-directed 
CredentialsRequests:
```go
type CredentialsRequestSpec struct {
...

// ProviderSpec contains the cloud provider specific credentials specification.
// +kubebuilder:pruning:PreserveUnknownFields
ProviderSpec *runtime.RawExtension `json:"providerSpec,omitempty"`

...
// CloudTokenPath (JWT token)
// +optional
CloudTokenPath string `json:"cloudTokenPath,omitempty"`
}
```

and `ProviderSpec` in the AWS case would include the following:

```go
type AWSProviderSpec struct {
...
// STSRoleARN is the Amazon Resource Name (ARN) of an IAM Role which was created manually for the associated
// CredentialsRequest.
// The presence of an STSRoleARN within the AWSProviderSpec initiates creation of a secret containing IAM
// Role details necessary for assuming the IAM Role via Amazon's Secure Token Service.
// +optional

> STSIAMRoleARN string `json:"stsIAMRoleARN"`

Author: ```suggestion
STSIAMRoleARN string `json:"stsIAMRoleARN,omitempty"`
```

```mermaid
graph  LR
  sa([ServiceAccount Signing Keys]) -- Public <br> Key -->s3[S3 Bucket w/ OIDC Config];
  sa([ServiceAccount Signing Keys]) -- Private <br> Key -->token_signing;
  service<-.->config
  service<-.->Pod
  Pod-->role
  subgraph cluster [AWS]
  s3;
  iam_id[IAM Identity Provider] -- Trust Tokens<br>Signed -->s3;
  role[IAM Role For Pod]<-->service[AWS Services];
  end
  subgraph cluster2 [OpenShift]
  token_signing[Token Signing]-->projected[Projected<br>ServiceAccount<br>Token];
  subgraph Pod
  config[AWS Config File]-->projected
  end
  end
  classDef plain fill:#ddd,stroke:#fff,stroke-width:4px,color:#000;
  classDef k8s fill:#326ce5,stroke:#fff,stroke-width:4px,color:#fff;
  classDef cluster fill:#fff,stroke:#bbb,stroke-width:2px,color:#326ce5;
  classDef cluster2 fill:#fff,stroke:#bbb,stroke-width:2px,color:#326ce5;
  class config,role,service,s3,projected,token_signing,iam_id,pod1,pod2 k8s;
  class sa plain;
  class cluster cluster;
  class cluster2 cluster1;
```

### API Extensions

Added to the CredentialsRequest API 

We outline this change using the AWS specific change, but other cloud provider specs will follow a similar pattern:

> Adding to the `spec.ProviderSpec` field, where `spec.ProviderSpec` would be an `AWSProviderSpec` for AWS-directed 

Reviewer 5: Adds some refs for reviewers to quickly get to where these APIs are defined

```suggestion
Adding to the `spec.ProviderSpec` field ([ref](https://github.com/openshift/cloud-credential-operator/blob/38e7f96bf73036924abcb1352222c17704e4b2e0/pkg/apis/cloudcredential/v1/types_credentialsrequest.go#L53-L55)), where `spec.ProviderSpec` would be an `AWSProviderSpec` ([ref](https://github.com/openshift/cloud-credential-operator/blob/38e7f96bf73036924abcb1352222c17704e4b2e0/pkg/apis/cloudcredential/v1/types_aws.go#L27-L31)) for AWS-directed 
```

## Summary

Many Cloud Providers offer services that allow authentication via Temporary Access Tokens (TAT).

For example, Amazon Web Services (AWS) Secure Token Service (STS) allows you to request temporary limited-privilege
credentials. A concrete example is write permission on an S3 bucket on AWS. STS is supported on all the major cloud
providers where OpenShift is deployed.

Currently, several Red Hat operators provide detailed instructions for how to use the operator on clusters where 
Cloud Credential Operator (CCO) is in Manual Mode, a mode where CCO is not capable of provisioning credentials on its 
own. The process has manual operations performed by the customer that are inconsistent across layered product operators.

This enhancement seeks to bring a unified set of standards and tooling to the process of enabling an
operator to access cloud provider resources using TAT, and improve the UX for consumers of these operators.

## Motivation

Several Red Hat operators have normal operating modes where they assure their operands have required cloud 
resources to perform properly. Most often, these operators use the Cloud Credential Operator's CredentialsRequest API in

> Mint mode to automatically create the IAM roles and credentials required for the operator to assume the role and 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Mint mode to automatically create a IAM user and credentials required for the operator to authenticate as the user and 
```

While providing the above goal, allow for multi-tenancy. In this sense multi-tenancy means that an operator may
enable its operands to communicate with the cloud provider instead of communicating with the cloud itself. Operands 
would use the same set of credentials as the operator. The operator will need to maintain its own logic to minimize 
conflicts when sharing credentials with operands.

Operator authors have a way to notify, guide, and assist OLM Operator admins in providing the required cloud provider
credentials matched to their permission needs for install and update.

Ideally, a solution here will work in both HyperShift (TAT always) and non-HyperShift(but TAT-enabled) clusters.

### Non-Goals

In-payload/CVO-managed operators are not included in this proposal, they are pre-provisioned for TAT enabled clusters
(at least for HyperShift)

Bring Your Own Credentials (BYOC) where an operator can manage and distribute credentials to its operands are out of
scope.

Sharing a set of credentials between all operands to aid multi-tenancy.

## Proposal

**Cloud Credential Operator (CCO) changes**: Adds a token-aware mode, while nominally set in "Manual" mode, CCO will

> look for and process CredentialRequests referenced in Operator CRs when:

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
look for and process CredentialRequests annotated in a specific way when:
```

it has nothing to do w/ "referenced in operator CRs", right?  it's just about putting a particular annotation on the CredReq that indicates it's for STS creds.

Reviewer 9: or if not an annotation (looks like i missed an update), then "aws provider credreqs containing an ARN value"?

Author: Changing to:
```md
look for CredentialRequests with ProviderSpecs containing TAT information (like ARN values for AWS, etc) when
```

```bash
# infrastructure platform is AWS
$ oc get infrastructure cluster -o jsonpath --template '{ .status.platform }'
AWS

# credentialsMode is "Manual"
$ oc get cloudcredential cluster -o jsonpath --template '{ .spec.credentialsMode }'
Manual

# serviceAccountIssuer is non empty
$ oc get authentication cluster -o jsonpath --template='{ .spec.serviceAccountIssuer }'
abutcher-oidc.s3.us-east-1.amazonaws.com
```

> This will operate in one of two ways depending on which other parts of this EP for other components are adopted: 

Reviewer 9: pod identity webhook should definitely be moved to the "alternatives" section at this point.  This EP presumes we are augmenting CCO to handle these new CredReqs.

> This will operate in one of two ways depending on which other parts of this EP for other components are adopted: 

Author: changing to note the main proposed changed and not mention 2 ways. We already discuss pod id webhooks in the alt section.

pod identity webhook.

CCO's token-aware mode will work by adding, for example for STS, a "role-arn"-type field on operator added 
CredentialsRequest objects. This is a new API field on the CredentialsRequest spec. When CCO acquires a 
CredentialsRequest it will create a Secret (as today mostly) with new functionality: Adding to the Secret a path to the
projected ServiceAccount token (static for OCP) and a roleARN (from the new field on the CredentialsRequest).

CCO with the changes anticipated here, operating in Manual mode, will continue to ignore CredentialsRequests that do not
contain the new STS related fields and as these are new fields, existing clusters won't have CredentialsRequests with 
those fields already.

Validation of CredentialsRequest by this new token-aware CCO? Maybe. Currently, CCO gets some permissions under ROSA
(unused), could expand these permissions to include tools like AWS's Policy Simulator such that it could validate a role
has permissions, and with this CCO could be the alerting mechanism for a changed CredentialsRequest without sufficient 
permissions.

CCO should consider adding the above, three-part test as a utility function exposed in the API.

> **HyperShift changes**: Include Cloud Credential Operator with token-aware mode (see above). Allows for processing of 

Reviewer 11: Is this proposing running the CCO in the management side?
Can we specify impact on control plane resource consumption, RBAC, networking access and cloud credentials reqs?

Reviewer 2: CCO will create config secrets in the same namespace where the CredRequest exists, while these are secrets they do not contain sensitive material such as actual credentials, those all go into the bound service account tokens.
CCO will, in the future, potentially assume roles for purposes of validating permissions assigned to a given role match the requirements.
Need to read Infrastructure CR and CloudCrentials CR.

I'm not sure if those require that it runs on management side or not, what do you think?

Reviewer 9: @bentito does the EP actually state where the CCO will run in a hypershift guest cluster topology?

Author: No, probably best bet is to ask some from HyperShift team for a suggestion on this. @csrwng can you help?

Reviewer 9: then it sounds like it is not resolved.  but i'll reiterate my expectation that the CCO runs in the control plane NS, not on the customer's worker nodes, and not visible to the customer.

Author: I committed changes inline with this threads commentary.

CredentialsRequests created by the Operator. Setting the Subscription config.ENV will allow UX for the information 
needed by CCO or webhook, for input of the cloud credentials while not having to change the Subscription API.
CLI Users will need to add the following to their subscription:

```yaml
kind: Subscription
metadata:
 name: ...
spec:
  config:
    env:
    - name: ROLEARN
      value: "<role ARN >"
```

Show in OperatorHub that the cluster is in a mode that supports token-based authentication by reading the 
`.spec.serviceAccountIssuer` from the Authentication CR, `.status.platformStatus.type` from the Infrastructure CR,
`.spec.credentialsMode` from the CloudCredentials CR.

Show that the operator is enabled for Token-based use by reading the CSV annotation provided by the operator author.

Generate a manual ack for operator upgrade when cloud resources are involved. This can be determined by parsing the 
Subscription objects. Ensures admin signs off that cloud resources are provisioned and working as intended before an 
operator upgrade. This could be by setting the default subscription mode to Manual in the UI for operators that support 

> TAT.

Reviewer 9: we're at the point in the EP where we need to start making choices.  So state which one we're actually going to implement, and if you think we'll do something else in the future, then include that as "future iterations could..."

i'd be inclined to just default to manual approvals for now (though really i think we should have always been doing that for all operator installs).

I think we need more data on how often operator permissions actually change before we introduce a mandatory admin-ack for upgrading.  We also need to see/think about whether we can do any better (i.e. proactively detecting when permissions have changed and only requiring the ack in that situation).

**Operator team changes**: Follow new guidelines for allowing for the operator to work on token auth 
enabled cluster. New guidelines would include the following to use CCO has detected cluster is using time-based tokens:

> - Changing CSV to add CredentialRequest RBAC

Reviewer 8: I don't recall seeing CSV defined before, might be useful for those with less context to spell it out on the first usage (eg. `Machine Config Operator (MCO)`)

Reviewer 9: https://olm.operatorframework.io/docs/concepts/crds/clusterserviceversion/

but yes, spelling it out is a good idea since not everyone is steeped in OLM-land

Reviewer 8: That link is also really helpful for those uninitiated in OLM (me!), thanks

Author: adding link to define it. ty.

> - Add CredentialRequests into a defined directory in the bundle

Reviewer 9: this isn't in plan, right?  OLM isn't going to do anything w/ this.

Reviewer 12: correct - changed it to
```suggestion
- If loading the CredentialRequests from a yaml, place it into a discoverable location in the codebase
```
to account for the alternatives of our How To doc.

> - Add a script in the operator description to help set up the correct role

Reviewer 2: A script per supported cloud, or is this script expected to communicate with the cluster, determine the cloud and render cloud specific output?

Author: I'm changing it to a script per supported cloud provider as that seems like the most reasonable first step.

Author: ```suggestion
- Add a script in the operator description, per supported cloud provider, to help set up the correct role
```

- Add a bundle annotation claiming token-based authentication support
- Add a script in the operator description to help set up the correct role
- (Optional) Add the projected ServiceAccount volume to the Deployment embedded in the CSV;
- handle the Secret themselves (like today’s CCO Mint mode, read and use the credentials in the Secret whose name they 
  know from the CredentialsRequest and is in the same Namespace)

> - Add structure to controller code to alert on missing cloud credentials, not crash.

Reviewer 9: i think this section may be outdated relative to what it is in https://docs.google.com/document/d/1iFNpyycby_rOY1wUew-yl3uPWlE00krTgr9XHDZOTNo/edit

 cloud provider resource access would not work) operators.

This graph shows the system as it needs to work (AWS only), not the proposed solution workflow:
```mermaid
graph  LR
  sa([ServiceAccount Signing Keys]) -- Public <br> Key -->s3[S3 Bucket w/ OIDC Config];
  sa([ServiceAccount Signing Keys]) -- Private <br> Key -->token_signing;
  service<-.->config
  service<-.->Pod
  Pod-->role
  subgraph cluster [AWS]
  s3;
  iam_id[IAM Identity Provider] -- Trust Tokens<br>Signed -->s3;
  role[IAM Role For Pod]<-->service[AWS Services];
  end
  subgraph cluster2 [OpenShift]
  token_signing[Token Signing]-->projected[Projected<br>ServiceAccount<br>Token];
  subgraph Pod
  config[AWS Config File]-->projected
  end
  end
  classDef plain fill:#ddd,stroke:#fff,stroke-width:4px,color:#000;
  classDef k8s fill:#326ce5,stroke:#fff,stroke-width:4px,color:#fff;
  classDef cluster fill:#fff,stroke:#bbb,stroke-width:2px,color:#326ce5;
  classDef cluster2 fill:#fff,stroke:#bbb,stroke-width:2px,color:#326ce5;
  class config,role,service,s3,projected,token_signing,iam_id,pod1,pod2 k8s;
  class sa plain;
  class cluster cluster;

>   class cluster2 cluster1;

Reviewer 2: This seems like valuable feedback for overall STS implementation but does this directly affect the changes being proposed in this enhancement? If not lets keep the focus of this enhancement on the OLM and Operator interactions here but find somewhere else to follow up on AWS STS improvements.

>   class cluster2 cluster1;

Reviewer 9: yeah i almost suggested removing this diagram entirely as very little of it is really relevant to what's being proposed here.  I decided not to suggest it since it's "helpful reference information", but this EP shouldn't be the canonical source of how STS/OIDC provider setup works.

>   class cluster2 cluster1;

Reviewer 13: >  but does this directly affect the changes being proposed in this enhancement? If not

You are right, does not affect this proposal.

Commented as informational for posterity when reading `the system as it needs to work (AWS only)`.

```

### API Extensions

Added to the CredentialsRequest API 

We outline this change using the AWS specific change, but other cloud provider specs will follow a similar pattern:

> Adding to the `spec.ProviderSpec` field ([ref](https://github.com/openshift/cloud-credential-operator/blob/38e7f96bf73036924abcb1352222c17704e4b2e0/pkg/apis/cloudcredential/v1/types_credentialsrequest.go#L53-L55)),<br>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Extend the existing RawExtension `spec.ProviderSpec` field ([ref](https://github.com/openshift/cloud-credential-operator/blob/38e7f96bf73036924abcb1352222c17704e4b2e0/pkg/apis/cloudcredential/v1/types_credentialsrequest.go#L53-L55)),<br>
```

We outline this change using the AWS specific change, but other cloud provider specs will follow a similar pattern:
Adding to the `spec.ProviderSpec` field ([ref](https://github.com/openshift/cloud-credential-operator/blob/38e7f96bf73036924abcb1352222c17704e4b2e0/pkg/apis/cloudcredential/v1/types_credentialsrequest.go#L53-L55)),<br>
where `spec.ProviderSpec` would be an `AWSProviderSpec` ([ref](https://github.com/openshift/cloud-credential-operator/blob/38e7f96bf73036924abcb1352222c17704e4b2e0/pkg/apis/cloudcredential/v1/types_aws.go#L27-L31)) for AWS-directed TAT.<p>
CredentialsRequests:
```go
type CredentialsRequestSpec struct {
...

// ProviderSpec contains the cloud provider specific credentials specification.
// +kubebuilder:pruning:PreserveUnknownFields

> ProviderSpec *runtime.RawExtension `json:"providerSpec,omitempty"`

Reviewer 8: As someone who maintains an API that looks like this, I would strongly advise against using a RawExtension.

Instead, created a discriminated union, that will look something like

```
credentialsRequest:
  platform: AWS
  aws:
    ststIAMRoleARN
```
You still have the `ProviderSpec` for each of your platforms, but they are direct members of the `CredentialsRequestSpec` and you can use a discriminator (`platform`) to define which of the platforms it should be looking at with the union

Please rework the structs into the DU pattern and I'll continue the review from there

Reviewer 5: @JoelSpeed `RawExtension` is unfortunately [already being used](https://github.com/openshift/cloud-credential-operator/blob/38e7f96bf73036924abcb1352222c17704e4b2e0/pkg/apis/cloudcredential/v1/types_credentialsrequest.go#L53-L55) for platform specific `ProviderSpec`.

Author: I think the code refs to ProviderSpec and AWSProviderSpec is sufficient to answer this concern, no?

Reviewer 2: Maybe this suggestion helps?
https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1339/files#r1222378967

Reviewer 8: Yeah the suggestion helps clarify this for me, thanks

...
// CloudTokenPath (JWT token)
// +optional

> CloudTokenPath string `json:"cloudTokenPath,omitempty"`

Reviewer 8: This needs more context, I've read through the enhancement and I'm not entirely sure what this is for. Is this the path that the operator expects the token to be available at within the pod?

Imagine I'm someone who hasn't read the enhancement, explain in the godoc everything I would need to know

Reviewer 9: yeah, not clear to me what component consumes this value or what they would do with it.

Reviewer 5: The AWS STS credentials secret looks like this and `CloudTokenPath` ultimately ends up in the secret CCO generates as the `web_identity_token_file` the AWS SDK expects.

```
apiVersion: v1
stringData:
  credentials: |-
    [default]
    role_arn = <role ARN>
    web_identity_token_file = <path to mounted service account token such /var/run/secrets/openshift/serviceaccount/token>
kind: Secret
type: Opaque
```

Similarly, the Azure credentials secret CCO generates contains an `azure_federated_token_file` field.

```
apiVersion: v1
data:
  azure_client_id: <client id>
  azure_federated_token_file: <path to mounted service account token such as /var/run/secrets/openshift/serviceaccount/token>
  azure_region: <region>
  azure_subscription_id: <subscription id>
  azure_tenant_id: <tenant id>
kind: Secret
type: Opaque
```

It's the path where the service account token was mounted on the deployment.

Here's a pass at a comment descriptor,

```
// cloudTokenPath is the path where the Kubernetes ServiceAccount token (JSON Web Token) is mounted
// on the deployment for the workload requesting a credentials secret.
// The presence of this field in combination with fields such as spec.providerSpec.stsIAMRoleARN
// indicate that CCO should broker creation of a credentials secret containing fields necessary for
// token based authentication methods such as with the AWS Secure Token Service (STS).
// +optional
CloudTokenPath string `json:"cloudTokenPath,omitempty"`
```

Reviewer 9: so the short version is that the value of this field gets injected into the Secret that the CCO creates.

the slightly longer version is that the serviceaccounttoken needs to be injected/mounted into that pod at the same location, but there is no central component that is going to ensure that is the case/validate that the credreq value and the mount/injection path are aligned.

basically it's up to the operator to define the credreq value correctly, especially since the operator itself doesn't even control the mount, k8s controls/chooses the SAToken mount path.

which makes me wonder if it should even be a configurable field value?  When would this field take on any value other than `/var/run/secrets/kubernetes.io/serviceaccount`

I guess i can envision a future state where the tokenpath might be something else, but at least for our immediate use case i think 100% of the time that will be the value, right?

Author: I am integrating Andrews expansions. We can resolve this thread.

}
```

and `ProviderSpec` in the AWS case would include the following:

```go
type AWSProviderSpec struct {
...

> // STSRoleARN is the Amazon Resource Name (ARN) of an IAM Role which was created manually for the associated

Reviewer 8: Nit, godoc should start with the json version of the name, not the go version. That way generated docs align for `oc explain` with the names users typically see

// CredentialsRequest.
// The presence of an STSRoleARN within the AWSProviderSpec initiates creation of a secret containing IAM
// Role details necessary for assuming the IAM Role via Amazon's Secure Token Service.
// +optional

> STSIAMRoleARN string `json:"stsIAMRoleARN,omitempty"`

Reviewer 8: So this is a string, does it have a pre-defined format? Can we use a kubebuilder validation to regex check that format? Pretty sure in openshift/api there are pre-existing examples of ARN validations

Author: So you'd like to see the EP call for this addition to the kubebuilder validations?

This provides the role information linked by policy to access various cloud resources.

`CloudTokenPath` provides the path to a JWT web token needed to access the resources.

### Risks and Mitigations

### Drawbacks

## Design Details

We have two PoC items:<br>
How CCO changes might be implemented: https://github.com/openshift/cloud-credential-operator/pull/525

How Cluster Logging Operator can be changed to work with this modified CCO: 
https://github.com/gallettilance/cluster-logging-operator/tree/sts

### Test Plan

Consider the following in developing a test plan for this enhancement:
- CCO should add unit tests for the new manner of working when in Manual mode but the 3-way test indicates running on
  a TAT enabled cluster.
- CCO should add e2e tests for the new manner of working when in Manual mode but the 3-way test indicates running on
  a TAT enabled cluster.
- CI will need to add a TAT mode for various cloud providers as a base for the e2e tests.
- A "canary" operator should be fielded in CI with e2e tests such that we have signal on breaking changes in TAT enabled
  clusters.

### Graduation Criteria

> #### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview
> #### Tech Preview -> GA

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Tech Preview -> GA
This feature will be introduced as part of the TechPreviewNoUpgrade featureset but is expected to graduate to GA within the same release upon successfully demonstrating e2e test pass rate meets or exceeds OCP baselines.
```

Reviewer 2: CC @JoelSpeed

Reviewer 8: That reads well to me if we can include it

#### Removing a deprecated feature

> #### Support Procedures

Reviewer 8: How spread are the changes required here? How many components in the core payload does this touch? Wondering if you have considered introducing the changes behind a feature gate at first?

Reviewer 2: They're being added to `TechPreviewNoUpgrade`. Will go make sure that the graduation criteria details that we will use the new scheme.

CCO and OLM are the only core components affected by this change beyond the TechPreviewNoUpgrade machinery.

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

### Version Skew Strategy

### Operational Aspects of API Extensions

Should be none. If the new fields on CredentialsRequest are missing, cloud resources will be unavailable for an 
operator, but there should be no other impacts.

#### Failure Modes

> If the added CredentialsRequest fields contemplated in this EP are missing, operators should wait them to appear. If

Author: Thanks, I am changing text to clarify that the operator should be waiting on the Secret to appear.

after a timeout period, the fields are not present, the operator should write events about the lack of access to cloud 
resources to the status of an appropriate resource to let admins know there are missing credentials.

## Implementation History

Not implemented yet.

> ## Alternatives

Reviewer 11: I'm curious has there been any consideration for the CCO to be consumed as a dependency of the OLM operator requiring it?

Reviewer 2: @enxebre Did you mean that a CCO like operator could be delivered via Operator Hub and operators which require this feature could depend on that operator?

}
```

On AWS STS, the `STSIAMRoleARN` would be something like:
`arn:aws:iam::269733383066:role/newstscluster-openshift-logging-role-name`<br>
This provides the role information linked by policy to access various cloud resources.

### Risks and Mitigations

### Drawbacks

## Design Details

We have two PoC items:<br>
How CCO changes might be implemented: https://github.com/openshift/cloud-credential-operator/pull/525

How Cluster Logging Operator can be changed to work with this modified CCO: 
https://github.com/gallettilance/cluster-logging-operator/tree/sts

### Test Plan

Consider the following in developing a test plan for this enhancement:
- CCO should add unit tests for the new manner of working when in Manual mode but the 3-way test indicates running on
  a TAT enabled cluster.
- CCO should add e2e tests for the new manner of working when in Manual mode but the 3-way test indicates running on
  a TAT enabled cluster.
- CI will need to add a TAT mode for various cloud providers as a base for the e2e tests.
- A "canary" operator should be fielded in CI with e2e tests such that we have signal on breaking changes in TAT enabled
  clusters.

### Graduation Criteria

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

#### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview
This enhancement will be introduced as TechPreviewNoUpgrade.

```

}
```

On AWS STS, the `STSIAMRoleARN` would be something like:
`arn:aws:iam::269733383066:role/newstscluster-openshift-logging-role-name`<br>
This provides the role information linked by policy to access various cloud resources.

### Risks and Mitigations

### Drawbacks

## Design Details

We have two PoC items:<br>
How CCO changes might be implemented: https://github.com/openshift/cloud-credential-operator/pull/525

How Cluster Logging Operator can be changed to work with this modified CCO: 
https://github.com/gallettilance/cluster-logging-operator/tree/sts

### Test Plan

Consider the following in developing a test plan for this enhancement:
- CCO should add unit tests for the new manner of working when in Manual mode but the 3-way test indicates running on
  a TAT enabled cluster.
- CCO should add e2e tests for the new manner of working when in Manual mode but the 3-way test indicates running on
  a TAT enabled cluster.
- CI will need to add a TAT mode for various cloud providers as a base for the e2e tests.
- A "canary" operator should be fielded in CI with e2e tests such that we have signal on breaking changes in TAT enabled
  clusters.

### Graduation Criteria

> 

Author: ```suggestion

### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview
This enhancement will be introduced as TechPreviewNoUpgrade.

```

CredentialsRequest objects. This is a new API field on the CredentialsRequest spec. When CCO acquires a 
CredentialsRequest it will create a Secret (as today mostly) with new functionality: Adding to the Secret a path to the
projected ServiceAccount token (static for OCP) and a roleARN (from the new field on the CredentialsRequest).

CCO with the changes anticipated here, operating in Manual mode, will continue to ignore CredentialsRequests that do not
contain the new STS related fields and as these are new fields, existing clusters won't have CredentialsRequests with 
those fields already.

Validation of CredentialsRequest by this new token-aware CCO? Maybe. Currently, CCO gets some permissions under ROSA
(unused), could expand these permissions to include tools like AWS's Policy Simulator such that it could validate a role
has permissions, and with this CCO could be the alerting mechanism for a changed CredentialsRequest without sufficient 
permissions.

CCO should consider adding the above, three-part test as a utility function exposed in the API.

**HyperShift changes**: Include Cloud Credential Operator with token-aware mode (see above). Allows for processing of 

> CredentialsRequest objects added by operators.

Author: ```suggestion
CredentialsRequest objects added by operators. 

The CCO is expected to run on the control plane NS, not on the customer's worker nodes, and not be visible to the customer. However if CredentialsRequests are created on the worker nodes, the CCO will process them and yield Secrets as described elsewhere in this document.
```

This provides the role information linked by policy to access various cloud resources.

### Risks and Mitigations

### Drawbacks

## Design Details

We have two PoC items:<br>
How CCO changes might be implemented: https://github.com/openshift/cloud-credential-operator/pull/525

How Cluster Logging Operator can be changed to work with this modified CCO: 
https://github.com/gallettilance/cluster-logging-operator/tree/sts

### Test Plan

Consider the following in developing a test plan for this enhancement:
- CCO should add unit tests for the new manner of working when in Manual mode but the 3-way test indicates running on
  a TAT enabled cluster.
- CCO should add e2e tests for the new manner of working when in Manual mode but the 3-way test indicates running on
  a TAT enabled cluster.
- CI will need to add a TAT mode for various cloud providers as a base for the e2e tests.
- A "canary" operator should be fielded in CI with e2e tests such that we have signal on breaking changes in TAT enabled
  clusters.

### Graduation Criteria

### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview
This enhancement will be introduced as TechPreviewNoUpgrade.

> #### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview

Author: ```suggestion
```

}
```

On AWS STS, the `STSIAMRoleARN` would be something like:
`arn:aws:iam::269733383066:role/newstscluster-openshift-logging-role-name`<br>
This provides the role information linked by policy to access various cloud resources.

### Risks and Mitigations

### Drawbacks

## Design Details

We have two PoC items:<br>
How CCO changes might be implemented: https://github.com/openshift/cloud-credential-operator/pull/525

How Cluster Logging Operator can be changed to work with this modified CCO: 
https://github.com/gallettilance/cluster-logging-operator/tree/sts

### Test Plan

Consider the following in developing a test plan for this enhancement:
- CCO should add unit tests for the new manner of working when in Manual mode but the 3-way test indicates running on
  a TAT enabled cluster.
- CCO should add e2e tests for the new manner of working when in Manual mode but the 3-way test indicates running on
  a TAT enabled cluster.
- CI will need to add a TAT mode for various cloud providers as a base for the e2e tests.
- A "canary" operator should be fielded in CI with e2e tests such that we have signal on breaking changes in TAT enabled
  clusters.

### Graduation Criteria

> ### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview
> This enhancement will be introduced as TechPreviewNoUpgrade.
> 
> This enhancement will be introduced as part of the TechPreviewNoUpgrade featureset affecting the Cloud Credential Operator, Console, and OLM. It is expected to graduate to GA within the same release upon successfully demonstrating e2e test pass rate meets or exceeds OCP baselines.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview
This enhancement will be introduced as TechPreviewNoUpgrade.

#### Tech Preview -> GA
This enhancement will be introduced as part of the TechPreviewNoUpgrade featureset affecting the Cloud Credential Operator, Console, and OLM. It is expected to graduate to GA within the same release upon successfully demonstrating e2e test pass rate meets or exceeds OCP baselines. Additionally, given we expect CCO to run on the Management Cluster in HCP scenarios we will need to profile CCO in this mode to ensure it meets resource constraints.
```

This provides the role information linked by policy to access various cloud resources.

### Risks and Mitigations

### Drawbacks

## Design Details

We have two PoC items:<br>
How CCO changes might be implemented: https://github.com/openshift/cloud-credential-operator/pull/525

How Cluster Logging Operator can be changed to work with this modified CCO: 
https://github.com/gallettilance/cluster-logging-operator/tree/sts

### Test Plan

Consider the following in developing a test plan for this enhancement:
- CCO should add unit tests for the new manner of working when in Manual mode but the 3-way test indicates running on
  a TAT enabled cluster.
- CCO should add e2e tests for the new manner of working when in Manual mode but the 3-way test indicates running on
  a TAT enabled cluster.
- CI will need to add a TAT mode for various cloud providers as a base for the e2e tests.
- A "canary" operator should be fielded in CI with e2e tests such that we have signal on breaking changes in TAT enabled
  clusters.

### Graduation Criteria

#### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview
This enhancement will be introduced as TechPreviewNoUpgrade.

#### Tech Preview -> GA

> This enhancement will be introduced as part of the TechPreviewNoUpgrade featureset affecting the Cloud Credential Operator, Console, and OLM. It is expected to graduate to GA within the same release upon successfully demonstrating e2e test pass rate meets or exceeds OCP baselines. Additionally, given we expect CCO to run on the Management Cluster in HCP scenarios we will need to profile CCO in this mode to ensure it meets resource constraints.
> 
> If the feature remains `TechPreviewNoUpgrade` OLM operators which had been updated assuming this feature is available should continue to provide admin documentation sufficient to manually enable TAT.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This enhancement will be introduced as part of the TechPreviewNoUpgrade featureset affecting the Cloud Credential Operator,
Console, and OLM. It is expected to graduate to GA within the same release upon successfully demonstrating e2e test pass rate
meets or exceeds OCP baselines. Additionally, given we expect CCO to run on the Management Cluster in HCP scenarios we will
need to profile CCO in this mode to ensure it meets resource constraints.

If the feature remains `TechPreviewNoUpgrade` OLM operators which had been updated assuming this feature is available should
continue to provide admin documentation sufficient to manually enable TAT.
```

---
title: tokenized-auth-enablement-operators-on-cloud
authors:
  - "@bentito"
  - "@jharrington22"
reviewers: # Include a comment about what domain expertise a reviewer is expected to bring and what area of the enhancement you expect them to focus on. For example: - "@networkguru, for networking aspects, please look at IP bootstrapping aspect"
  - "@joelanford" # for OLM, OperatorHub changes
  - "@bparees" # for OLM, OperatorHub changes
  - "@csrwng" # for HyperShift changes
  - "@spadgett" # for Console changes
approvers:
  - "@sdodson"
api-approvers: # In case of new or modified APIs or API extensions (CRDs, aggregated apiservers, webhooks, finalizers). If there is no API change, use "None"

>   - "@abutcher" # for CCO API changes, or please suggest alternative

Reviewer 8: This should be myself and/or @deads2k

Author: Ah, so I wonder if this should be `None`? API proposed changes are just in CCO and possibly removing pod-identity webhook from HyperShift.

Author: Ah, nevermind, forgot where `CredentialsRequest` lives. Yep, adding you @JoelSpeed

deployed. Currently, several Red Hat operators provide detailed instructions for how to use the operator on STS-enabled
clusters. The process is designed to have manual operations performed by the customer. This enhancement seeks to bring common standards to the process of enabling an
operator to access cloud provider resources, by enabling automation, UX and logic for the process. 

## Motivation

Several important Red Hat operators have normal operating modes where they assure their operands have required cloud 
resources to perform properly. Currently, when a cluster is installed on a cloud platform an admin is required to 
follow instructions (for example [1]) to provide STS-based credentials to the operator such that needed resources can be
accessed by the operand. This enhancement seeks to normalize this process across operators, so users of several of them
have the same experience and similar steps to perform. We aim to automate and reduce those steps as much as possible to 
make adding operators (via OLM) simpler on an STS enabled cluster.

### User Stories

> * As a cluster admin I know which OLM Operators support tokenized authentication for my cloud.

Reviewer 8: Is this a goal or a user story, user stories are normally formed as "As a <persona>, I want to <do something>, so that I can <achieve some goal>", I think this has the persona and goal, but not the what to do, is the intention to have some identifier on the operators or something?

* As a cluster admin of a cluster using tokenized cloud auth I know what's required to install and upgrade OLM Operators whenever those operators manage resources that authenticate against my cloud.
* As an Operator developer, I have a standard framework to define tokenized authentication requirements and consume them, per supported cloud.
* As an Operator Hub browser I know which operators support tokenized cloud auth and on which clouds.
* As the Hypershift team, where the only credential mode for clusters/customers is STS (on AWS) , the Red Hat branded
  Operators that must reach the AWS API, should be enabled to work with STS credentials in a consistent, and automated
  fashion that allows customer to use those operators as easily as possible, driving the use of layered products.

### Goals

Allow Day-2 Operators to access cloud provider resources as seamlessly as possible when being installed, used and
updated on STS enabled clusters.

While providing the above goal, allow for multi-tenancy. In this sense multi-tenancy means that an operator may
provide different cloud provider credentials per operand such that operator users may uniquely access non-shared cloud

> resources.

Reviewer 9: imho/aiui this is a non-goal and outside the scope of the problem we've been asked to solve (operand creds).

Operator authors have a way to notify, guide, and assist Day-2 Operator admins in providing the required cloud provider
credentials matched to their permission needs for install and update.

> Ideally, a solution here will work in both HyperShift (STS always) and non-HyperShift clusters.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
The same solution is used for both HyperShift (STS always) and non-HyperShift(but STS enabled) clusters.
```

### Non-Goals

> Day 1 operators are not included in this proposal, they are pre-provisioned for STS enabled clusters (at least 

Reviewer 8: So for an IPI cluster, the user still needs to set up the STS tokens manually for the core, then gets day 2 automation? That seems like an odd choice to me, is there a strong issue with changing the core which makes it expand the scope of this enhancement drastically

Reviewer 9: There's still setup for the day 2 operators.

My understanding is that ROSA *might* automate the creation of roles and attach the appropriate ARN to the olm subscription, but that's only ROSA and only if they have the permissions to be able to do that.  (This is dependent on a few things, not the least of which is coming up with a way for the olm operator to communicate what roles/permissions it needs, in a programmatically, and bundle-version-specific, way)

Anyone installing an operator not on ROSA, or not going through the ROSA cli, is going to have to setup the aws roles manually based on guidance from the olm operator about what it needs.

Author: I think you asked and answered. Time. If we expand this scope to include more than Day 2 operators we increase the time needed to complete this.

Reviewer 9: Some additional context:  The focus here is on ROSA STS clusters, not STS clusters in general(though they may benefit from improved workflows here).

The concern is that it currently looks strange to customers that when they provision a service(ROSA) through AWS(or through the rosa command line), that service requires the user go do additional things elsewhere in AWS.  So the IPI scenario is not the same and doesn't trigger the same sort of disjoint/schizophrenic UX.

Reviewer 3: @JoelSpeed I don't see why core operators can't do this in the future but its time we're restricted to at the moment, this feature shouldn't prevent us from automating the secret creation for core operators in the future. We will still have the issue of getting the ARN to the CredentialsRequest for core operators which will likely require changes in the installer to better assist users. The focus here is day-2.

Author: I think this can be marked resolved now

for HyperShift)

## Proposal

> **Cloud Credential Operator (CCO) changes**: Adds a token-aware mode, while nominally set in "Manual" mode, CCO will

Reviewer 8: So this token aware mode comes on automatically in manual mode? How will this affect upgraded clusters?

Reviewer 9: my assumption was that it would only processes credreqs that have an ARN(i.e. STS token credrequests), not generally for all credreqs, though now as i read this i don't see that called out.

Author: Can you expand the question a bit more with what you're concerned about? As opposed to adding another mode to CCO the proposal is to make several checks in CCO when in Manual mode to detect and handle time-based token auth (STS on AWS) enabled clusters differently. Not sure I understand how this logic is different for upgrades?

Reviewer 9: the concern is that on upgrade, if the CCO is in manual mode, it could suddenly start processing CredReqs it had previously ignored, which would be surprising and undesirable behavior.

Reviewer 12: what do you mean by process the CredReqs? In manual mode CCO doesn't do anything with the credReqs afaik.

Reviewer 12: can you clarify why an operator upgrade might change CCO's behavior toward the CredReqs created by the operator?

Reviewer 5: > what do you mean by process the CredReqs? In manual mode CCO doesn't do anything with the credReqs afaik.

I had suggested in [comment](https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1339#discussion_r1170592044) that CCO remain in `Manual` mode for this but only reconcile CredenditlasRequests that have the new fields when the cluster has a `serviceAccountIssuer` + platform=AWS etc indicating that the cluster where CCO is running is STS-capable when in `Manual` mode.

look for and process CredentialRequests referenced in Operator CRs when:

```bash
# infrastructure platform is AWS
$ oc get infrastructure cluster -o jsonpath --template '{ .status.platform }'
AWS

# credentialsMode is "Manual"
$ oc get cloudcredential cluster -o jsonpath --template '{ .spec.credentialsMode }'
Manual

# serviceAccountIssuer is non empty
$ oc get authentication cluster -o jsonpath --template='{ .spec.serviceAccountIssuer }'
abutcher-oidc.s3.us-east-1.amazonaws.com
```

> ``. This will operate in one of two ways depending on which other

Reviewer 8: I think the backticks here are causing rendering issues

Author: they look accidental, fixing.

parts of this EP for other components are adopted: specifically HyperShift/Rosa adding CCO with these token-aware
changes or continuing with the current support for the pod identity webhook.

CCO's token-aware mode will work by adding a "role-arn"-type field on operator added CredentialsRequest objects.

> This is a new API field on the CredentialsRequest spec. When CCO acquires a CredentialsRequest it will create a Secret 

Reviewer 8: What's the motivation for this being on the spec? Would you not expect this to be on the status? Does a user need to be able to adjust this? What would happen if a user changed this value?

Reviewer 9: if the ARN is changed i'd expect the secret to be updated w/ the new ARN, and consumers of the secret to pick up the change.

If it was on status i'm not clear where the ARN value would actually come from?

Author: I'm not sure, you'll have to educate me a bit. I would think that status is reserved for status items coming back from the cluster whereas spec (and possibly we'd put this is a subfield) is something configured by some sort of user or app process before application to the cluster? The CredentialsRequest is meant to be created by the operator, or an install process when the operator is installed. It could be updated by an admin I'd think or an automated process. @abutcher thoughts?

Reviewer 5: > Does a user need to be able to adjust this?

User may want to be able to change the role ARN in the event that the role were deleted by some external process and the role needed to be recreated.

> What would happen if a user changed this value?

Agree with above, if the value changed the secret should be updated with the new value and consumers notice the change.

Reviewer 12: +1 on it being in the spec. It's a desired configuration. @abutcher Does CCO add ownerRefs to the secret created from the CredReq?

Reviewer 5: CCO does not add an `ownerRef` for secrets created for mint mode but it looks like CCO does add an annotation pointing back to the `CredentialsRequest`, 

```
metadata:
  annotations:
    cloudcredential.openshift.io/credentials-request: openshift-cloud-credential-operator/openshift-machine-api-aws
```

Author: going to make this resolved.

As an OpenShift user I want the STS enablement solution to be as cloud-agnostic as possible.

### Goals

Allow Day-2 Operators to access cloud provider resources as seamlessly as possible when being installed, used and
updated on STS enabled clusters.

While providing the above goal, allow for multi-tenancy. In this sense multi-tenancy means that an operator may
provide different cloud provider credentials per operand such that operator users may uniquely access non-shared cloud
resources.

Operator authors have a way to notify, guide, and assist Day-2 Operator admins in providing the required cloud provider credentials matched to their permission
needs for install and update.

Ideally, a solution here will work in both HyperShift (STS always) and non-HyperShift clusters.

### Non-Goals

Day 1 operators are not included in this proposal, they are pre-provisioned for STS enabled clusters (at least 
for HyperShift)

## Proposal

**Cloud Credential Operator (CCO) changes**: Add a "Token" mode, distinct from disabled/manual mode that will look for 
and process CredentialRequests referenced in Operator CRs. This will operate in one of two ways depending on which other

> parts of this EP for other components are adopted: specifically HyperShift/Rosa adding CCO with Token mode or continuing

Reviewer 5: As discussed, if CCO is deployed on Hypershift we would need to disable the controller that deploys the AWS pod identity webhook since Hypershift runs the pod identity webhook sidecar to the control plane.

The pod identity webhook deployment controller currently [checks the cluster infrastructure object](https://github.com/openshift/cloud-credential-operator/blob/bc2623480d290dcf9d4ea3ccc4717159f6799afd/pkg/operator/awspodidentity/awspodidentitywebhook_controller.go#L132-L139) to enable the controller when `.status.platform` is `AWS` and could also check for `.status.controlPlaneTopology: External` to determine that we're on a Hypershift cluster.

Reviewer 9: > As discussed, if CCO is deployed on Hypershift we would need to disable the controller that deploys the AWS pod identity webhook

where was this discussed?  (can i read it?)

i'm wondering why it's a problem if both run(my understanding is the webhook looks for annotated SAs and injects a mount into the pod...  the CCO logic is just going to look for credreq objects and create a secret(not even force it to be mounted, though most likely pods will mount it)?  So it doesn't seem like the two are in direct conflict.

and also what are the implications may be on users/components that already expecting the AWS pod identity webhook to be running if it is disabled?

Reviewer 5: > where was this discussed? (can i read it?)

This was brought up in one of our weekly sync meetings.

> i'm wondering why it's a problem if both run(my understanding is the webhook looks for annotated SAs and injects a mount into the pod... the CCO logic is just going to look for credreq objects and create a secret(not even force it to be mounted, though most likely pods will mount it)? So it doesn't seem like the two are in direct conflict.

> and also what are the implications may be on users/components that already expecting the AWS pod identity webhook to be running if it is disabled?

Hypershift is already running the pod identity webhook sidecar to the control plane pods (same pod identity webhook that CCO would deploy when installed on an AWS cluster) so just saying that we shouldn't deploy it because its already there.

Reviewer 9: ah, sorry, i misunderstood.  per my other [comment](https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1339#discussion_r1170453839) my expectation is that this EP doesn't result in any situation where we deploy or rely on the AWS pod identity webhook.

Reviewer 5: https://github.com/openshift/hypershift/blob/47ce832a0a0acc4690461676f3a00c4feb929a49/control-plane-operator/controllers/hostedcontrolplane/kas/deployment.go#L213-L244

Author: only as an alternative solution in the EP. Going to mark this resolved for now.

> with the current support for the pod identity webhook.

Reviewer 5: I think we should avoid adding a `"Token"` `credentialsMode` unless our intent is for existing AWS STS, GCP Workload Identity Federation and (soon) Azure Workload Identity clusters to start utilizing this mode in the installer & documentation because I worry it would be confusing to users otherwise. Also, the credentials are manually maintained by the user so `"Manual"` makes sense as a `credentialsMode`.

Would it be reasonable (and possible?) for operators & the console to determine that a cluster is STS-enabled by checking the cluster `authentication`, `cloudcredential` and `infrastructure` config CRs?

For example,

```
# infrastructure platform is AWS
$ oc get infrastructure cluster -o jsonpath --template '{ .status.platform }'
AWS

# credentialsMode is "Manual"
$ oc get cloudcredential cluster -o jsonpath --template '{ .spec.credentialsMode }'
Manual

# serviceAccountIssuer is non empty
$ oc get authentication cluster -o jsonpath --template='{ .spec.serviceAccountIssuer }'
abutcher-oidc.s3.us-east-1.amazonaws.com
```

If it will not be possible for an operator to check the above I wonder if it would make sense to add something to the `infrastructure` CR indicating that the cluster is an observed STS mode? I'm not sure if the `infrastructure` CR works like that.

Reviewer 9: Not adding a "Token" mode has much bigger implications than how we determine if the a cluster is in STS mode..it means someone/something else becomes responsible for creating the secret containing the ARN+tokenpath.  It also means we lack an easy way to validate+report whether the ARN in question has the requested permissions.

Reviewer 5: When CCO starts up it disables the CredentialsRequests controller when the `credentialsMode` is `"Manual"`. I think that we could enable the controller in all `credentialsMode`s but only reconcile CRs in `"Manual"` mode when they have the spec field (roleARN, GCP/Azure equivalents) for brokering secret creation.

Reviewer 2: I think we just assume that if CredentialRequest `.spec.roleARN` or `.spec.GCPRole` or `.spec.AzureRole` have been set we're in token mode. If none of those, or more than one are set, we do nothing emitting an error in the latter.

In one sense the admin manually created the role and told us about it, but CCO is definitely actively engaged in creating the config secret. Overall I'm not too worried about manual mode no longer being inert but looking for spec values unique per cloud and keying off of that.

Author: yep, adopted yours and Andrew's suggestions around this. Quoted Andrew's triple check test and started referring to this CCO being token-aware everywhere in the doc.

Reviewer 8: Can we clarify somewhere what the differences in behaviour are between manual mode pre-this enhancement and post, in particular it would be good to understand what happens when:

CCO Token mode will work by adding a "role-arn"-type field on operator added CredentialsRequest objects. This is a new
API field on the CredentialsRequest spec. When CCO acquires a CredentialsRequest it will mint a Secret (as today 
mostly) with new functionality: Adding to the Secret a path to the projected ServiceAccount token (static for OCP) 
and a roleARN (from the new field on the CredentialsRequest).

Validation of CredentialsRequest by Token mode CCO? Maybe. Currently, CCO gets some permissions under ROSA (unused),
could expand these permissions to include tools like AWS's Policy Simulator such that it could validate a role has 
permissions, and with this CCO could be the alerting mechanism for a changed CredentialsRequest without sufficient 
permissions.

> **Pod Identity Webhook mode** (Deployed on classic ROSA, ROSA on HyperShift, standard OCP and Hypershift)

Author: true, moving it there.

**OperatorHub and Console changes**: Allow for import of additional, well-known, bundle annotations which will result 
in ENV variables on the Subscription object. Show operator is enabled for Token-based use based on Console determining 
cluster is running in token-based authentication enabled cluster by reading the `.spec.serviceAccountIssuer` from the Authentication CR, `.spec.platformSpec.type` from the Infrastructure CR,`.spec.credentialsMode` from the CloudCredentials CR  AND
bundle has token-based auth enabled annotation. This info should be written to a new field on Subscription objects.
The Subscription fields will allow UX for the information needed by CCO or webhook, for input of the cloud credentials. 
Generate a manual ack for operator upgrade when cloud resources are involved. This can be determined by parsing the 
Subscription objects. Ensures admin signs off that cloud resources are provisioned and working as intended before an 
operator upgrade.

**Operator team/ Operator SDK changes**: Follow new guidelines for allowing for the operator to work on token auth 
enabled cluster. New guidelines would include the following to use CCO Token mode:

> - changing CRD to add CredentialRequest references and putting those referenced

Author: Or the operator in some cases. Cluster Logging Operator needs them for the operator, well unless you think of fluentd as the operand... then I guess yes the operand needs them.

> - changing CRD to add CredentialRequest references and putting those referenced

Author: I think I tend to agree. This can go. @jharrington22 @gallettilance ? Agree?

> - changing CRD to add CredentialRequest references and putting those referenced

Reviewer 14: What about the case where the operator communicates with the cloud API on behalf of the operand? And the operator wants to allow different operands to use different credentials?

> - changing CRD to add CredentialRequest references and putting those referenced

Reviewer 9: > What about the case where the operator communicates with the cloud API on behalf of the operand? And the operator wants to allow different operands to use different credentials?

i don't see that as being fundamentally different from "operator provisions creds for the operand and gives them to the operand", so i'd still consider it out of scope.

> - changing CRD to add CredentialRequest references and putting those referenced

Reviewer 14: I guess I was thinking of the case where the operator isn't actually authorized/able to generate creds and relies on the operand to bring their own. But I'm admittedly unfamiliar with whether that makes sense in an STS context.

Either way, I think I agree that operand credentials are between the operator and the operand and not something OLM would be aware of.

> - changing CRD to add CredentialRequest references and putting those referenced

Reviewer 12: that should be out of scope for this enhancement.

> - changing CRD to add CredentialRequest references and putting those referenced

Author: I agree this is out of scope and the EP mentions it as out of scope now.

> - CredentialRequests into a defined directory in the bundle

Reviewer 9: So "extend olm to support CredRequest resource types" becomes a requirement, right?

(as long as the solution is going through CCO and not doing something else like directly creating secrets, or using the aws pod identity webhook)

> - CredentialRequests into a defined directory in the bundle

Reviewer 14: So the idea is that operators that talk to cloud APIs can embed a static CredentialsRequest in their bundle, and that is expected to work on all potential clusters and cluster configurations where anyone would want to install that operator?

Operators don't need to probe that the CredentialRequest API is available and to see whether STS mode is enabled or not to decide whether to create and what to put in the CredentialRequest?

Do any of these operators ever make sense to deploy on a cluster where CCO is not running?
Do bundles that include CredentialsRequest need to declare a GVK dependency on that API?

> - CredentialRequests into a defined directory in the bundle

Reviewer 12: In the case where it's the operand that needs a CredReq, OLM doesn't need to know about the CredReq, the operator would apply it with the operand deployment / setup. I agree we want it in a consistent place but I'm not sure the bundle manifests is the right spot because it's not something that we know we want applied at install time.

> - CredentialRequests into a defined directory in the bundle

Reviewer 12: At install time we know we need to give the operator the role ARN for example for STS. But that's it, it will decide when to create the CredReq.

> - CredentialRequests into a defined directory in the bundle

Reviewer 14: OLM does not support CredReqs in the bundle. It _does_ support some Console APIs in the bundle, so there's at least precedent for having OCP-specific APIs supported this way.

It isn't there today, and would need to be added if we wanted OLM to be able to create CredReqs at install time.

> - CredentialRequests into a defined directory in the bundle

Reviewer 3: Going to resolve this thread since OLM creating CredentialsRequests is not in scope for this enhancement. OLM may be later extended to support CredentialsRequests but that would be handled in a separate enhancement.

> - CredentialRequests into a defined directory in the bundle

Author: okay, it's been a week, marking resolved, James' reasoning is sound on reason to resolve.

> - Add a bundle annotation claiming token-based authentication support

Author: done

> - add the projected ServiceAccount volume to deployment;

Author: I think we're making it a requirement if you want to support STS-enablement the way we're discussing here. There are operators without ServiceAccounts at all I believe. @gallettilance @abutcher ?

> - add the projected ServiceAccount volume to deployment;

Reviewer 9: i guess i'm still not clear that this is something the operator author should (or needs to) do, vs either it always being done(is already being done), or having OLM do it automatically(if it is not already automatically done)

> - add the projected ServiceAccount volume to deployment;

Reviewer 5: Right, the SA volume will be required to be already present on the deployment such as on the [cluster-ingress-operator's deployment](https://github.com/openshift/cluster-ingress-operator/blob/a29464eda9614ac3d70c185b572f4839195e7306/manifests/02-deployment.yaml#L121-L128).

The pod-identity-webhook can add the SA volume by mutating the pod spec but the solution described does not rely on the webhook so without something performing an SA volume mutating function the SA volume needs to be there ahead of time.

> - add the projected ServiceAccount volume to deployment;

Author: yes, and this is called out in the EP now.

- handle the Secret themselves (like today’s CCO Mint mode, read and use the credentials in the Secret whose name they 
  know from the CredentialsRequest and is in the same Namespace)
- Guidance to operator authors to structure controller code to alert on missing cloud credentials, not crash.

SDK to support this new template. SDK to validate and in particular: alert on any permission changes between operator
versions.

> ### Workflow Description

Reviewer 2: lgtm

> ### Workflow Description

Reviewer 9: two issues w/ the above flow:

1) the operator pod can't mount the secret because it doesn't exist until the operator has come up.  Joe and I discussed this and there are various flows that could be done w/ init containers, or you can just punt and force the operator to wait for + read the secret directly.  None are great answers.  But you can really only avoid that problem if something else (console, OLM) creates the credreq/secret in order to ensure it exists when the deployment is created.

2) my understanding is that step(3) needs to be made transparent in the future (meaning somehow the roles the operator needs are communicated to one of the tools/components involved in the install, so it can create the necessarily roles).  But that may not be an obstacle to phase 1.

> ### Workflow Description

Author: added

Making a layered operator ready to work on an STS enabled cluster will involve the following steps:

For the operator author team:
- Add CredentialRequests to the bundle, known location;

> - Add "role-arn"-type fields to the CredentialRequests

Reviewer 2: Also it doesn't seem like something the operator cares about. OLM and CCO are the ones connecting the dots here.

> - Add "role-arn"-type fields to the CredentialRequests

Reviewer 2: Nevermind, as you said, the operator is responsible for mutating the CredentialsRequest.

> - Add "role-arn"-type fields to the CredentialRequests

Reviewer 9: I guess to put my question another way:

the operator may be responsible for creating a CredReq that includes the ARN(we need to decide if the operator creates that directly, or olm creates it as part of installing the operator...i haven't seen that made clear, nor am i sure how it works today for non-STS clusters?)  But first it has to get the ARN from somewhere, and that's the responsibility of the console+OLM.

> - Add "role-arn"-type fields to the CredentialRequests

Author: @jharrington22 could you answer here? I'll incorporate what you say in the comment to clarify the enhancement text.

> - Add "role-arn"-type fields to the CredentialRequests

Reviewer 3: Today the operator or a user will create the credentials request. Having OLM apply the credentials request is not unreasonable and would have an impact on classic OSD where Red Hat provides the AWS account. 

I think for this proposal we should separate the creation of CredentialsRequests by OLM to be considered later. What component creates the CredentialsRequest wont impact how CCO handles it.

> - Add "role-arn"-type fields to the CredentialRequests

Reviewer 9: for purposes of this EP i mostly just want us to feel confident about what the operator will have to do.

this, for example, is not viable today:
```
Add CredentialRequests to the bundle, known location;
```

because olm won't do anything w/ a credreq in a bundle.

and if the operator is creating the credreq itself, then the operator needs to know to:
1) consume the ARN from somewhere (presumably env on the deployment that is there as  result of the subscription)
2) inject that ARN into the credreq it is creating, properly.

i agree this is largely orthogonal to "enhance the CCO to generate Secrets for STS-enabled clusters", so if the intent is to scope the EP only to the CCO changes, then we can just remove all this discussion about how the CredReq is created and how the Secret is consumed because it's not relevant to the CCO changes.

but i think if we want to be confident that the CCO changes will be useful to the target audience(operator authors), it behooves us to clearly and explicitly define the entire workflow including the pieces the operator will need to implement(and as noted on the call today, there might be 2 or more ways an operator could implement things)

> - Add "role-arn"-type fields to the CredentialRequests

Author: @bparees It seems like this thread hasn't been addressed fully? I'd like to push people to start looking at re-reviewing and moving towards approving this EP. Are there changes you can suggest that would resolve this?

> - Add "role-arn"-type fields to the CredentialRequests

Reviewer 9: i think it is resolved now since it states that the operator will be creating the credreq, whereas before it said the credreq would be static in the bundle.

example is write permission on an S3 bucket on AWS. STS is supported on all the major cloud providers where OpenShift is
deployed. Currently, several Red Hat operators provide detailed instructions for how to use the operator on STS-enabled
clusters. The process is designed to have manual operations performed by the customer. This enhancement seeks to bring common standards to the process of enabling an
operator to access cloud provider resources, by enabling automation, UX and logic for the process. 

## Motivation

Several important Red Hat operators have normal operating modes where they assure their operands have required cloud 
resources to perform properly. Currently, when a cluster is installed on a cloud platform an admin is required to 
follow instructions (for example [1]) to provide STS-based credentials to the operator such that needed resources can be
accessed by the operand. This enhancement seeks to normalize this process across operators, so users of several of them
have the same experience and similar steps to perform. We aim to automate and reduce those steps as much as possible to 
make adding operators (via OLM) simpler on an STS enabled cluster.

> ### User Stories

Author: Okay I adopted this shorter list, but kept one of the Hypershift use case mentions as it's important to draw attention to (IMO)

operator upgrade.

**Operator team/ Operator SDK changes**: Follow new guidelines for allowing for the operator to work on token auth 
enabled cluster. New guidelines would include the following to use CCO Token mode:

- changing CRD to add CredentialRequest references and putting those referenced
- CredentialRequests into a defined directory in the bundle
- Add a bundle annotation claiming token-based authentication support
- add the projected ServiceAccount volume to deployment;
- handle the Secret themselves (like today’s CCO Mint mode, read and use the credentials in the Secret whose name they 
  know from the CredentialsRequest and is in the same Namespace)
- Guidance to operator authors to structure controller code to alert on missing cloud credentials, not crash.

SDK to support this new template. SDK to validate and in particular: alert on any permission changes between operator
versions.

### Workflow Description

Making a layered operator ready to work on an STS enabled cluster will involve the following steps:

For the operator author team:
- Add CredentialRequests to the bundle, known location;
- Add "role-arn"-type fields to the CredentialRequests

> - Add references to the CredentialRequests in the CRD spec;

Reviewer 3: Will this be the trigger for OpenShift/OLM to distinguish if an operator needs credentials?

Author: I think that's the only reason we need this reference, so yes.

Reviewer 9: isn't this only relevant if the operand needs creds?  At which point i feel like we're outside the scope of the problem.  (We got STS creds to the operator, from there it's up to the operator to get creds to the operand in whatever way it chooses)

Author: I'm taking this out because I agree it's beyond scope. But should we add a bundle annotation that is simply `tokenAwareEnabled`, or similar, for operator bundles? For the reason @jharrington22 gives, as a way to easily show in the UX that the operator needs setup for time-based token cluster (STS). @bparees ? @jharrington22 ?

Author: Removing "Add references to the CredentialRequests in the CRD spec;" in upcoming commit

accessed by the operand. This enhancement seeks to normalize this process across operators, so users of several of them
have the same experience and similar steps to perform. We aim to automate and reduce those steps as much as possible to 
make adding operators (via OLM) simpler on an STS enabled cluster.

### User Stories

* As a cluster admin, I want to know which OLM Operators support tokenized authentication for my cloud, so that I can
  provide token-based access for cloud resources for them.
* As a cluster admin of a cluster using tokenized cloud auth, I want to know what's required to install and upgrade OLM 
  Operators whenever those operators manage resources that authenticate against my cloud so they can function properly
* As an Operator developer, I want to have a standard framework to define tokenized authentication requirements and
  consume them, per supported cloud, so that my operator will work on token-based authentication clusters.
* As an Operator Hub browser, I want to know which operators support tokenized cloud auth and on which clouds so I can

>   see only a filtered list of operators that will work on the given cluster.

Reviewer 14: Are there two facets here?
1. tokenized cloud auth is relevant to this operator
2. tokenized cloud auth is supported by this operator

If an operator doesn't talk to a cloud API at all, tokenized cloud auth is irrelevant, so should it still show up in this filtered list?

Reviewer 14: Also, is this filter view aware of the credential mode of the cluster? If my cluster is not using STS mode, will I still be presented with a "supports STS view"?

Author: on non-STS, no, the idea is not to see supports STS or anything like that in the UX.

 On the former comment, that was considered. If an operator has no cloud access reqs, there's no harm is also listing it as supporting STS.

Reviewer 9: > On the former comment, that was considered. If an operator has no cloud access reqs, there's no harm is also listing it as supporting STS.

how are you going to make the determination?  I only see two options:

1) opt-in - operators must tag themselves as supporting STS (including operators that don't need creds at all)
2) opt-out - operators must tag themselves as not supporting STS

of those, only (1) seems reasonable (we wouldn't want to have operators imply they support STS that don't), so that means to achieve "If an operator has no cloud access reqs, there's no harm is also listing it as supporting STS." you need to get all those operators to tag themselves as supporting STS.  Which i'm skeptical about achieving.

Which is to say, i expect when you turn on the "STS-supported" filter, you're going to see a subset of the operators that actually work on STS mode.

Which i think means we need to name the tag/flag/filter carefully, something like "STS enabled", meaning the operator has explicit support for STS, and do not pick a tag/flag/filter name that implies that "if the operator isn't on this list, it won't work on an STS cluster" (because many operators will work on STS clusters, despite not being explicilty enabled for them, because they have no cred requirements)

Author: Ok added verbiage to the OperatorHub workflow noting the badge naming suggestion and reasoning.

parts of this EP for other components are adopted: specifically HyperShift/Rosa adding CCO with these token-aware
changes or continuing with the current support for the pod identity webhook.

CCO's token-aware mode will work by adding a "role-arn"-type field on operator added CredentialsRequest objects.
This is a new API field on the CredentialsRequest spec. When CCO acquires a CredentialsRequest it will create a Secret 
(as today mostly) with new functionality: Adding to the Secret a path to the projected ServiceAccount token 
(static for OCP) and a roleARN (from the new field on the CredentialsRequest).

Validation of CredentialsRequest by this new token-aware CCO? Maybe. Currently, CCO gets some permissions under ROSA
(unused), could expand these permissions to include tools like AWS's Policy Simulator such that it could validate a role
has permissions, and with this CCO could be the alerting mechanism for a changed CredentialsRequest without sufficient 
permissions.

**HyperShift changes**: Include Cloud Credential Operator with token-aware mode (see above). Allows for processing of 
CredentialsRequest objects added by operators.

> **OperatorHub and Console changes**: Allow for import of additional, well-known, bundle annotations which will result 

Reviewer 14: > **OperatorHub and Console changes**
To clarify, the proposed UX is purely client driven?
- Client reads the bundle metadata
- Client reads the cluster mode
- Client creates a Subscription and populates its env overrides accordingly?

Reviewer 12: Seems like the priority is console users. There is precedent for this with multi arch for example where console users get a filter that CLI users don't get.

in ENV variables on the Subscription object. Show operator is enabled for Token-based use based on Console determining 
cluster is running in token-based authentication enabled cluster by reading the `.spec.serviceAccountIssuer` from the 
Authentication CR, `.spec.platformSpec.type` from the Infrastructure CR,`.spec.credentialsMode` from the 

> CloudCredentials CR  AND bundle has token-based auth enabled annotation. This info should be written to a new field on 

Reviewer 14: ```
bundle has token-based auth enabled annotation
```
Could we be more specific about what we mean by bundle annotation? And how do we expect Console to determine what bundles support STS mode (and what permissions they need)?

As far as I know, console's view of the catalog is via the packagemanifests API, which contains a subset of the CSV fields for channel heads only. Does this EP take a stance on how Console should determine the STS-relevant info it would need to install a non-channel head bundle?

Author: I think this has been added to the EP now, more specificity and how Console accesses this. @gallettilance had a PoC for the Console now. @gallettilance want to link it here?

Author: marking this resolved

permissions.

**HyperShift changes**: Include Cloud Credential Operator with token-aware mode (see above). Allows for processing of 
CredentialsRequest objects added by operators.

**OperatorHub and Console changes**: Allow for import of additional, well-known, bundle annotations which will result 
in ENV variables on the Subscription object. Show operator is enabled for Token-based use based on Console determining 
cluster is running in token-based authentication enabled cluster by reading the `.spec.serviceAccountIssuer` from the 
Authentication CR, `.spec.platformSpec.type` from the Infrastructure CR,`.spec.credentialsMode` from the 
CloudCredentials CR  AND bundle has token-based auth enabled annotation. This info should be written to a new field on 
Subscription objects. The Subscription fields will allow UX for the information needed by CCO or webhook, for input of 
the cloud credentials. Generate a manual ack for operator upgrade when cloud resources are involved. This can be 
determined by parsing the Subscription objects. Ensures admin signs off that cloud resources are provisioned and working

> as intended before an operator upgrade.

Reviewer 14: > new ... Subscription fields

Is this proposing a change to the OLM Subscription API?

> Generate a manual ack for operator upgrade when cloud resources are involved.

It isn't clear to me what this means. If the Subscription has `spec.installPlanApproval: Automatic`, but an upgrade requires cloud API permission changes, it seems like we would be violating user intent by injecting a manual ack.

But this leads me to a boarder question: at what point of the OLM install/upgrade progression would this manual ack be injected, and how would it be surfaced to a user? Would OLM be expected to check the permissions so that the ack is only required if permissions need to change, or are we expecting users to manually ack every single install/upgrade involving an STS-supporting bundle deployed on an STS-enabled cluster?

- Guidance to operator authors to structure controller code to alert on missing cloud credentials, not crash.

SDK to support this new template. SDK to validate and in particular: alert on any permission changes between operator
versions.

### Workflow Description

Making a layered operator ready to work on an STS enabled cluster will involve the following steps:

Operator installation under the proposed system:
1. user goes to console and starts operator install
2. console detects token-based (STS) cluster, and token-based-supporting operator
3. console prompts user to create roles+supply ARN-type string
4. console creates subscription with ARN-type string embedded as a spec.config.env
5. operator deployment is created with ARN-type string in env
6. operator creates `CredentialsRequest` including the ARN-type string
7. Cloud Credential Operator populates Secret based on `CredentialsRequest`
8. operator loads Secret, makes cloud service requests

For the operator author team:
- Add CredentialRequests to the bundle, known location;
- Add "role-arn"-type fields to the CredentialRequests
- Add references to the CredentialRequests in the CRD spec;

> - Use SDK to validate bundle to catch permission changes or mis-configuration

Reviewer 14: Is this some sort of static validation of the annotations? Or is this suggesting that SDK somehow assesses the requests the operator intends to make and warns/errors if they require increased permission?
